# Ma et al. Genome Biology (2022) 23:208

Page 9 of 31

Reduced in a homozygous TNF deletion [49]. As the strains of Acinetobacter implicated in gut inflammation are unlikely to be those responsible for, e.g., nosocomial infections, further investigation of both clades using more detailed data or IBD-specific isolates is warranted.

Among treatment variables (samples or time points during which subjects were receiving antibiotics, immunosuppressants, steroids, and/or 5-ASAs), antibiotics had the strongest effects on individual taxa, as well as the greatest number of significantly associated taxa (Fig. 3b). These associations are also broadly in agreement with previous observations for microbiome responses to antibiotics in IBD or generally, e.g., the depletion of Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and Bacteroides in patients treated with antibiotics, and the enrichment of (often stereotypically resistant) taxa such as Streptococcus, Acinetobacter, and the Enterobacteriaceae, with differential responses to the treatment groups speaking to both administration considerations and their impact on host versus microbial community bioactivities (Additional file 2: Supplemental Notes).

Subsets of IBD-linked taxa were additionally associated with the diseases’ phenotypic severity (Fig. 4a, Additional file 7: Table S5). Montreal classification [44] was used as a proxy for disease severity, including Behavior categories for Crohn’s disease (B1 non-stricturing, non-penetrating, B2 stricturing, non-penetrating, B3 stricturing and penetrating) and Extent for ulcerative colitis (E1 limited to rectum, E2 up to descending colon, E3 pancolitis). We tested for features differentially abundant in the more severe phenotypes when compared against the least severe category (B1 CD and E1 UC, “Methods”). Among statistically significant results, many extended those identified above as overall IBD associated (Fig. 3b), such as the depletion of Faecalibacterium in B3 CD and Roseburia in B2 CD, as well as the enrichment of Enterobacteriaceae in E3 UC. In most cases, microbial dysbiosis was also additionally aggravated from the moderate to the most extreme disease manifestations; such differences were statistically significant (“Methods”) in, for example, the progressive depletion of Bacteroides in CD and UC, as well as the enrichment of Enterobacteriaceae in UC. This meta-analysis is uniquely powered to detect these subtle differences, which aid in shedding light on the microbiome’s response to progressive inflammation and disease subtypes. Pancolitis corresponds with a unique microbial configuration distinct from regional colitis and not generally detectable in smaller studies [6], for example, while more severe CD induces essentially a more extreme form of the same dysbiosis observed in less severe forms of the disease.

Additionally, diseases (CD and UC) and their corresponding dysbioses also interacted distinctly with the microbiome under different treatment regimes and in different biogeographical environments (mucosa vs. stool, Fig. 4b, Additional file 8: Table S6). Interaction effects, in the statistical sense, were defined as a main exposure (IBD or treatment) having differential effects on taxon abundance with respect to either sample type (biopsy/stool) or diseases (CD/UC); they were identified via moderator meta-analysis models (“Methods”). Overall, we found elevated effects of both CD (relative to controls) and antibiotic treatment in stool as compared to biopsy-based measurements of the microbiome (Additional file 8: Table S6). An example of this is Dehalobacterium, with significantly greater depletion in CD stool relative to biopsies (Fig. 4b). Dehalobacterium, as with Turicibacter above, is underrepresented in reference sequence databases, better-detected by amplicon sequencing, and thus not a common microbial signature.