# Abbas-Egbariya et al. Genome Biology (2022) 23:61

bacterial signals in IBD [4, 5, 36]. A thorough systematic review [4] of published results compared 45 articles noted that increase in Enterobacteriaceae taxa and a decrease in the butyrate producing Faecalibacterium prausnitzii seem to be consistent across studies. Our analyses imply that decrease in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is seen across multiple diseases and are likely not IBD-specific. Another landmark meta-analysis study took the second approach [5], started from the raw data of 28 published case-control studies, that sequenced different regions on the 16S gene (not limited to the V4 region), and also highlighted the depletion of health-associated bacteria across multiple diseases, and some specific microbial signal in colon cancer but not in IBD. We took the third approach, limiting the analyses to similar sequencing region of the 16S (V4). This reduces the number of available studies, but it enables ASV rather than taxonomy-based comparison. For example, 2 different Clostridium ASVs showed opposite direction of change (SV14256 increased and SV12376 decreased, Dataset S1) and a similarly opposite pattern was noted for 2 Ruminococcus ASVs (SV14506 and SV08112). The non-specific health-associated taxa included Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Coprococcus (family: Lachnospiraceae) ASVs. In contrast to previous studies, we highlight also ASVs that are induced (rather than only reduced) as part of the non-specific signal including Clostridium XlVa (known as Enterocloster), Lactobacillus salivarius, and Rothia (family: Micrococcaceae). Similarly, a recent meta-analysis of microbiome gene functions of nearly 2000 publicly available fecal metagenomic samples of 7 different diseases also identified many functions that were linked to and overlapped with multiple diseases [46].

Disease-specific microbial ASVs may suggest a more direct link to pathogenesis, and those can be used as biomarkers for diagnostics and for design of potential future interventions. We identified 13 UC/CD-specific ASVs bacteria that were more increased in IBD compared to other diseases. Those included taxa from Gemellaceae, Dialister (family: Veillonellaceae), Blautia producta (family: Lachnospiraceae), and Streptococcus (family: Streptococcaceae). Gemellaceae taxa were previously linked with the risk for future CD flare [1]. Additionally, in cystic fibrosis, Gemella was also increased during exacerbation and was found to be the most discriminative genus between baseline and exacerbation samples [47]. Similarly, presence of Streptococcus in stool samples before CD surgery is predictive of future CD recurrence based on endoscopic scores 6 months after surgery [48]. Streptococcus and Veillonella can interact metabolically, co-occur in ecosystems, and co-aggregate in biofilms [49], and their combined incubation results in higher IL8 cytokines secretions from dendritic cells [50]. Two of the UC/CD specific ASVs (Clostridium perfringens and Ruminococcus gnavus) were also part of non-specific signals but those showed significant increase in CD and UC. Those taxa were shown to be specifically reduced during antibiotic treatment in pouchitis IBD patients who responded to treatment, further indicating potential causal associations between those taxa and gut inflammation [51]. Interestingly, many of those IBD-specific bacteria were shown to be present in saliva samples. This may be due to the lower bacterial biomass observed in IBD feces [2, 52, 53], thus leading to an increased fraction of bacteria present in swallowed saliva, or that some of these oral bacteria affect the gut immune response. Further studies are required to clarify these questions.

Disease classifiers are frequently used to identify patients with a given disease. However, since most focus on a single disease and a group of healthy controls, the presence of