# Abbas-Egbariya et al. Genome Biology (2022) 23:61

a strong disease non-specific bacterial response may influence the performance if used outside of the original study in diverse population with different diseases. Our results show that a classifier trained on IBD disease cohort classified with relatively good performance disease/control states in lupus, schizophrenia, or Parkinson’s. This raises the concern that such classifier can incorrectly classify patients with other unrelated disease as cases of the disease of interest. Notably, our results do not preclude the possibility of classifiers to differentiate between different diseases when trained on datasets containing multiple diseases, but rather that it is recommended to train those classifiers also on a large set of diseases.

The concept of a dysbiosis index for estimation of the general host dysbiosis or healthy state was suggested in the landmark IBD study [2] and in recent shotgun sequencing dataset [54]. The recent shotgun sequencing dataset used 4347 human stool metagenomes from 34 published studies across healthy and 12 different disease conditions highlighting 50 bacterial species more prevalent in pooling data from healthy vs. nonhealthy state cases. Once generated, this index can be applied on other shotgun datasets. We expanded this idea using 12,838 subjects, 59 disease cohorts, and 28 diseases, and we generated an index that can be applied to dataset generated using 16S sequencing. We note that an advantage of shotgun compared to 16S sequencing is that shotgun dataset can also inform regarding metabolic pathways and functions, which can be an interesting future approach for to define healthy vs. nonhealthy state pathways across diseases.

Our UniDI is shown to perform better than the CD dysbiosis index [2] indicating that UniDI can successfully differentiate between most cases and controls across a wide variety of diseases. One possible use for UniDI is its application as an additional tool for prioritizing fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) donors, where it is desired to obtain samples from donors with lower disease probability. Another application as already suggested [54] for such index is for providing insight into one’s health status from a gut microbiome and for inferring the likelihood of disease independent of the clinical diagnosis. In addition, this index can be calculated per samples and can be included in gut microbial personal report, which can also be followed longitudinally for variations linked with diet and environmental modification in clinical studies.

Our work has several strengths, we included 12,838 subjects, 59 disease cohorts, and 28 diseases from around the world, and the results can be generalizable to those regions. By analyzing only studies covering the V4 region, combined with a unified denoising approach, we combined the different studies at the ASV rather than taxonomic assignments, which are typically limited to the genus level for amplicon sequencing. Additionally, by calculating the within-study disease effect, and using these effect sizes rather than the per-sample abundances, we were able to mitigate biases originating from the different cohorts and experimental methods. Limitations include the need to have controls in each study to capture the effect size, the inability to capture variations between controls, and that it is unlikely but possible that the controls in one cohort have the disease in another cohort. Nevertheless, the grouping of IBD and Parkinson’s disease cohorts from several cohorts using the effect size pipeline is reassuring, and in some of the larger cohort, controls were randomly divided between disease cohorts. Other limitations include the limited metadata characteristics across cohorts and the use of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing (rather than shotgun data) which limits the ability to