# Ma et al. Genome Biology (2022) 23:208

on biopsy samples), disease status (IBD/control), and disease types (CD/UC, con-

ditional on IBD) consistently had the strongest effect on the microbiome among

studies. Several relationships between study design and phenotypic effects were

apparent. Batches had a particularly strong effect in CS-PRISM and RISK, for exam-

ple, where biopsy and stool samples were also perfectly separated by batch. Treat-

ment exposures all had small effects on microbiome structure within studies, which

typically reached statistical significance only when combined by meta-analysis; anti-

biotics were an exception with slightly larger effects. Montreal classification did not

generally correspond with significant variation, while age (at sample collection as

stratified below and above 18, and at diagnosis by Montreal age classification [44])

had small but significant effects. The effects of gender and race were not significant.

Lastly, for longitudinal studies, relatively stable differences between subjects over

time were large and significant, consistently for both longer-interval (HMP2) as

well as densely sampled cohorts (Herfarth, daily samples), in agreement with previous

individual studies’ observations [9, 23].

We identified individual taxonomic features consistently associated with disease and

treatment variables (Fig. 3b, Additional file 6: Table S4), with meta-analysis multivari-

ate differential abundance analysis (MMUPHin_MetaDA), adjusting for common demo-

graphics (age, gender, race) and further stratifying for sample type and disease when

appropriate (“Methods,” Additional file 5: Table S3). At a very high level, differential

abundance patterns between CD and control microbiomes were consistent with, and

often more severe than contrasts between UC and control, confirming with increased

resolution previous observations that CD patients tend to have more aggravated dys-

biosis than UC patients [9]. As expected, our meta-analysis confirms many of the taxa

associated with IBD reported by previous individual studies (Fig. 3b, detailed in Addi-

tional file 2: Supplemental Notes); they also agreed with important features as identified

through other types of predictive, rather than hypothesis testing, machine learning mod-

els (Additional file 1: Fig. S11 [45]. These findings agree with the emerging hypotheses of

pro-inflammatory aerotolerant clades (e.g., Escherichia and other Enterobacteriaceae)

forming a positive feedback loop in the gut during inflammation, often of oral origin

[7] (e.g., Fusobacterium, Dialister, Veillonella), and depleting the gut’s typical fastidious

anaerobe population as a result (primarily Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and other

Clostridia and Firmicutes clades) [9].

We also identified two taxa not previously associated with IBD, both of modest effect

sizes and likely newly detected by the meta-analysis’ increased power. The genus Acine-

tobacter was enriched in CD, and Turicibacter was depleted. Turicibater in particular

is poorly represented in reference sequence databases, with only nine genomes for one

species (Turicibacter sanguinis) currently in the NCBI genome database; this makes it

easy to overlook in shotgun metagenomic profiles relative to amplicon sequencing. The

genus Acinetobacter, conversely, is quite well characterized due to its role in antimicro-

bial resistant infections [46], and it was previously linked specifically to the primary scle-

rosing cholangitis phenotype in UC [47], although without follow-up to our knowledge.

Turicibacter is overall less characterized both in isolation and with respect to disease,

although our findings and others’ suggest it might be inflammation-sensitive when pre-

sent; it was one of many clades increased in mice during CD8+ T cell depletion [48] and