# Discussion

Microbiome studies in general, and the IBD gut microbiome in particular, stand to benefit from meta-analysis, as have other multiply sampled conditions such as colorectal cancer [51, 52]. This is a major hurdle in establishing reproducibility of clinically relevant disease biomarkers, i.e., ecological and microbiological changes during disease that are reproducible across populations. Both the findings and methodology presented in this work are thus of interest, allowing MMUPHin to be validated and to leverage increased sample sizes from combined studies. However, all microbial community meta-analyses should be approached with caution, since in many cases unwanted sources of technical variation between studies (i.e., batch effects) are so large as to potentially mask biological signals even after correction [53–55] (Additional file 2: Supplemental Notes).

Reducing interstudy variation in microbial community profiles is challenging relative to other ‘omics data types due to (1) the extreme heterogeneity of microbes within most communities (exacerbating both technical and biological differences), and (2) feature zero inflation arising from both biological and technical reasons [13, 56]. MMUPHin alleviates this problem by taking care to incorporate batch/study effects in each of its components, not just during batch effect normalization (MMUPHin_Correct): mixed effects modelling was adopted for differential abundance meta-analysis to allow for residual per-study effects (MMUPHin_MetaDA); PC network clustering prioritizes consistent biological signals over batch effects (MMUPHin_Continuous).

Thus despite these challenges, MMUPHin was able to meta-analyze amplicon profiles in this study both to associate microbial shifts with disease outcome, to associate them with treatment-specific differences, and to identify a single pattern of typical microbial variation within IBD. While previous efforts have developed IBD dysbiosis scores by contrasting patients with control groups [7, 9], this pattern of microbial variation was present specifically within IBD patients (both CD and UC), and in agreement with supervised methods, captured several classes of microbial functional responses in the gut (Additional file 2: Supplemental Notes).

We consider this study based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing to be a proof of concept, able to achieve unprecedented power due to the number of amplicon profiled samples available, but with greater precision possible in future work using, e.g., metagenomic and other ‘omics technologies. This also enabled comparison of responses in the stool versus mucosal microbiomes, the latter of which are not amenable to metagenomic profiling from biopsies; these were in overall good agreement, but the few areas of significantly differential responses to inflammation are likely of particular immunological interest.

The large sample and population sizes also provide some confidence in ruling out discrete, microbially driven population subtypes as an explanation for CD and UCs’ clinical heterogeneity. Instead, the work identified a single consistent axis of gradient microbial change corresponding to increasing departures from “normal” microbiome configurations [7, 9, 57]. This pattern of consistent microbial dysbiosis can continue to be explored in further work on its functional, immunological, and clinical consequences.

Overall, this study represents one of the first large-scale, methodologically appropriate, targeted meta-analysis of the IBD microbiome, and the corresponding methodology and its implementation are freely available for future meta-analyses of human-associated and environmental microbial populations.