# Shaw et al. Genome Medicine (2016) 8:75

Further, none of the responders in our study were UC patients. Additional studies in larger patient cohorts are needed to clarify any distinct features of the microbiome among IBD patients.

Our subjects were followed for an average of 8 months and included patients who both responded and did not respond to treatment. Although the dysbiosis index improved over time in patients, it did not reach levels seen in controls. This finding has important implications for pathogenesis: it suggests that with aggressive treatment of inflammation and symptoms (as was the case in our population) disease activity will improve, but the gut microbiome may remain perturbed. This finding is in line with a recent paper by Forbes et al., who found that there was no clear difference between microbiota of inflamed and non-inflamed mucosa in either CD or UC, suggesting that gut dysbiosis is the driver of inflammation rather than a result of it [37].

This pattern of persistent dysbiosis further emphasizes the need for prospective, longitudinal tracking with extensive follow-up: microbiome trends, microbiome resilience, and return to “healthy” composition may all be important to assess [38]. A larger study to investigate the impact of different treatments is also needed. Observations from such studies will open new therapeutic opportunities aimed at ameliorating dysbiosis in the hope of either preventing disease or limiting future complications.

At the individual genus level, several genera showed differences between groups in our GEE, random forest models, or both, with six bearing special mention: Akkermansia, Coprococcus, Fusobacterium, Veillonella, Faecalibacterium, and Adlercreutzia. In our sample, Akkermansia had a higher pretreatment abundance in non-responders compared to responders (Fig. 4b). The genome of Akkermansia, identified in our random forest analysis, contains mucinase genes [39] and is considered to be a mucin-degrading bacterium [40]. In gnotobiotic mice, Akkermansia increases inflammation in mice co-infected with Salmonella typhimurium [41]. We also found that Coprococcus (a genus identified in both GEE and random forest analyses) was diminished in cases compared to controls, and was further diminished in non-responders. In fact, agglutinating antibodies for Coprococcus were briefly considered as a biomarker for CD screening [42].

We have previously reported significantly higher abundance of Fusobacterium and Veillonella in the stool of treatment-naïve CD patients [19]. In our GEE analysis we again identified these two genera at increased abundance in cases, especially in non-responders to therapy. One recent study by Kelsen et al. identified significantly increased levels of these two taxa, among others, in the subgingival microbiome of patients with CD who were not taking antibiotics [43]. This prompts the hypothesis that oral cavity microbiota, also seen in the guts of IBD patients, may play a significant role in the pathogenesis and progression of IBD. Species of Fusobacterium are also associated with a wide variety of negative health outcomes, such as dental plaque, periodontal disease, Lemierre syndrome [44], head and neck infections [45], and especially colon cancer [46, 47].

Faecalibacterium, a genus of interest from our random forest analysis, includes the species F. prausnitzii. One particular strain of this species—A2-165—was recently found by Rossi et al. to have an important role in anti-inflammatory processes. This bacterium was particularly adept at eliciting high levels of IL-10 production, enhancing ovalbumin-specific T cell proliferation, and reducing interferon gamma-positive T cells. Treatment with A2-165 even attenuated inflammation in a murine model of chronic relapsing colitis [48]. Because Faecalibacterium abundance was found to be decreased in non-responders compared to responders, our study supports further investigation into the prognostic and therapeutic possibilities of this strain.

Another genus significant in both GEE and random forest analyses, Adlercreutzia, was found to be decreased in cases and further decreased in non-responders compared to responders. This genus was originally identified in human feces and found to play an important role in the metabolism of isoflavones to equol, a non-steroidal estrogen [49]. To our knowledge, the role of Adlercreutzia in IBD has not yet been explored; however, its appearance in the significant results of both our GEE and random forest analyses suggest it may be a future target of interest.

Genera from the families Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae appear several times in our GEE and random forest results. Though not included in the dysbiosis index, members of these families were found to be characteristic of tissue samples from Crohn’s disease in a recent study by Tyler et al. [50]. Four of the top 15 most important genera identified by our classifier belong to the family Lachnospiraceae, and all are reduced in non-responders compared to responders. Further research is needed into the possible contribution of members of this family to IBD pathophysiology.

Our study has several limitations. Some control subjects were related to affected subjects; however, the unrelated controls actually had significantly higher microbial dysbiosis than the related controls, suggesting shared environment did not overly inflate dysbiosis in the related study subjects. One factor that may have contributed to this trend is that some related controls were parents and were hence older than the affected subjects. Additionally, there was variation in the number of samples obtained from each patient. To correct for this variation, we weighted samples for each study subject according to the number of samples they.