# Potential Microbiome-Related Therapeutics, Diagnostics, and Prognostics

Although there is no cure available for CD or UC, a number of treatments are available for inducing remission. These treatment options vary depending on disease severity and disease type, and often have a significant effect on the microbiome. For mild to moderate IBD, 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) or antibiotic therapy have been used to induce remission [5], which in some studies appears to affect the gut microbiome [30]. The same authors also implicated several bacterial taxa, previously associated with disease severity, with antibiotic usage in paediatric UC patients [30]. These results were echoed in a previous study on paediatric CD that found antibiotic usage to increase microbiome dysbiosis in CD [48]. Antibiotic usage was also associated with both bacterial and fungal dysbiosis in a cohort of paediatric CD patients by Lewis et al. [60]. These findings, along with studies examining antibiotics as potential causative agents in the general paediatric population [61] and observational studies linking antibiotic usage in children to an increased risk of developing IBD [62, 63], highlights the need for further study of the long-term effects on paediatric IBD gut post-antibiotic-induced remission.

Corticosteroids, biologic therapy (anti-TNF agents such as infliximab, often for non-responders to traditional treatments), and thiopurines are used to treat children with UC and CD for moderate to severe disease [5]. Steroid treatment, however, comes with additional risk for paediatric patients, as it is imperative to avoid stunting growth in children who may already be at risk of growth retardation due to malnutrition, particularly patients with CD. Schirmer and colleagues also found 47 taxa associated with corticosteroids, whereof a majority were correlated with both remission and non-remission groups, raising the question of whether these changes in microbial composition are a by-product of treatment, or a driving factor in the efficacy of the treatment of IBD [30]. The interaction between biological therapies, such as anti-TNF, and the microbiome has not been extensively documented in paediatric IBD patients. However, Firmicutes and Mycoplasma hominis were decreased in paediatric IBD patients treated with biologic therapy compared with conventional methods (EEN in CD, and steroids and 5-ASA in CD and UC) [29]. No reduction in fungal colonisation in paediatric CD following treatment with anti-TNF has been observed [60].

In addition to medication-based treatments, both diet interventions and surgery are commonly used in the treatment of IBD. Special diets are found to help in CD, such as exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN), partial enteral nutrition (PEN) with a free diet, and CD exclusion diets (CDED). In Europe, EEN is currently recommended as first-line treatment for new cases [64]. These diets can have a profound effect on the microbiome, and microbial changes associated with treatment diets have been found in a multitude of IBD studies. Lewis and co-authors found that the microbiome composition of paediatric CD patients who responded to EEN was more similar to healthy controls than those who did not respond to EEN treatment. The authors also observed decreased fungal colonisation after EEN treatment [60] and Haemophilus species (associated with disease severity in paediatric UC [30]). The genus Alistipes was further increased in children receiving EEN but negatively associated with antibiotic treatment. In particular, Alistipes finegoldiii and Alistipes putredinus were decreased in paediatric CD patients, but these increased with EEN treatment (EEN was only given to CD patients) [46]. Escherichia coli has also been reported to be negatively associated with EEN treatment, indicating a shift towards a more ‘healthy’ microbiome with this treatment [46]. The authors also observed these trends in UC patients, who were treated with either aminosalicylates or aminosalicylates and corticosteroids. It is worth noting that those on EEN in this study were also receiving thiopurines [46]. In contrast, Quince and colleagues found that the microbiota did not return to that seen