# Zhao et al. Microbiome (2022) 10:115

of several Ruminococcaceae genera and Eubacterium could increase SCFA concentrations, thus protecting intestinal barrier function and exerting anti-inflammatory properties in the host [44]. Moreover, since Christensenellaceae is considered a potential probiotic that is negatively correlated with inflammation and metabolic-related diseases [45], the higher abundance of Christensenellaceae in M-DSS pigs suggests that defence against disease may be triggered in Min pigs. The more interesting finding, however, was the role of Lactobacillus in Min pigs. Lactobacillus expresses tryptophanase and is the most important commensal that metabolises tryptophan [46]. Lactobacillus protects the integrity of the intestinal epithelial barrier damaged by pathogenic bacteria and reduces the number of potentially pathogenic bacteria [47, 48]. Consistent with other studies, restoration of mechanical function and enrichment of tryptophan metabolites were observed in Min pigs. The data herein of microbiota and microbial pathways suggested that Min pigs can adjust the commensal bacteria to achieve disease remission.

The gut microbiota can produce diverse metabolites via anaerobic fermentation of exogenous undigested dietary components that reach the colon as well as endogenous compounds that are generated by microbes and the host. Microbial metabolites can access and interact with host cells to affect immune and inflammatory responses. Strong associations between colonic microbiota and metabolites were found by pairing metabolomics with microbiota sequencing analysis, showing changed levels of indole derivatives, bile acid, SCFAs and other metabolites. Previous studies have implicated that specific classes of metabolites, notably bile acids, SCFAs and tryptophan metabolites, were linked to the pathogenesis of IBD [37, 49]. We observed reduced SCFA concentrations and inhibition of taurine and hypotaurine metabolism in Yorkshire pigs. Min pigs exhibited a starkly different trend than Yorkshire pigs. In Min pigs, acetate, propionate, butyrate, valerate and isovalerate levels were enhanced, which were associated with the alteration of indigenous microbiota, and thus attenuated mucosal inflammation. In addition, tryptophan metabolism was promoted in Min pigs, which correspond to the increased abundances of Lactobacillus and other potentially beneficial microbes, indicating the gut microbiota can reduce tryptophan excretion and liberated more tryptophan to the host. Gut commensal bacteria can utilise tryptophan to ameliorate DSS-induced colitis by promoting colonic goblet cell differentiation and inducing mucin gene expression [37, 46]. These changes might explain the higher disease resistance of Min pigs compared with Yorkshire pigs. Additionally, the data on colonic metabolites that correlated negatively with disease activity showed that anileridine (spasmolytic action in the intestine [50]) and spermidine (protective role in colitis and colon carcinogenesis [51]) were decreased in Y-DSS pigs, suggesting an out-of-control state. Anileridine content was increased in M-DSS pigs, further supporting the ability of Min pigs to resist acute colitis. Overall, the results of the present study indicated that the beneficial gut microbes in Min pigs heal the colon and recover metabolites, given the good correlation between the gut microbiota and metabolites.

Microbial imbalance can directly contribute to gut barrier dysfunction and an immature immune system [52]. Gut barrier dysfunction is also strongly correlated with inflammation [53]. To further study the potential links of the gut microbiota with the host immune response and intestinal barrier function in the two pig breeds, RNA-seq analysis of the colons of Min pigs and Yorkshire pigs was performed. GO analyses showed enrichment of pathways involved in immune function, including the immune response, inflammatory response and antimicrobial humoral immune response mediated by antimicrobial peptides, in both Min and Yorkshire pigs, suggesting a response to exogenous stimuli. Although the responses were similar, the colonic inflammatory response was more active in Y-DSS pigs than in M-DSS pigs. Specifically, several PRRs signalling and downstream inflammation-related pathways, such as Toll-like receptor 4 binding, NOD-like receptor signalling, NIK/NF-κB, I-κB kinase/NF-κB signalling and proinflammatory cytokines secretion pathways, were enriched in Yorkshire pigs but not Min pigs. In agreement with the GO enrichment results, the increase of some NLR and TLR genes and their downstream proinflammatory factors were observed in Y-DSS pigs but not M-DSS pigs, which were confirmed by Elisa analysis and real-time PCR. It has been reported that PRRs, such as TLR4, NOD1 and NOD2, initiate inflammatory responses by sensing microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMP) [54, 55]. PRRs serve the function of distinguishing potentially beneficial microbes and potentially harmful microbes, with different consequences for the host (inflammation versus immune homeostasis) [56]. Moreover, recent data suggested that the context in which the host receptors (PRRs) receive MAMP stimulation determines the quality of the inflammatory and immune response [57, 58]. DSS notoriously disrupts intestinal barrier integrity, allowing commensal microbiota to intestinal epithelium [59, 60]. In Y-DSS pigs, with the increase of potentially harmful microbes, such as Spirochaetes [61], microbial ligand signals were received in the presence of intestinal barrier damage and thus might activate PRRs signalling and downstream inflammation-related pathways.