# Armstrong et al. Microbiome (2023) 11:39

that the lower CD4 + counts translate to a diminished disease process [35]. This idea too requires further evaluation and does not consider that the use of cART may also impact on the pathogenesis of IBD as demonstrated herein with the IL-10−/− model [35].

The “virus + susceptibility gene” model of colitis is the IL10−/− mouse is confounded somewhat because part of the “susceptibility” is related to the development of MMTV infection. Indeed, the parental strains do not manifest phenotypic features of MMTV infection, but infection emerges in the absence of IL-10 [36]. A similar process has been reported in other models following genetic manipulation to create immune deficiency.

For example, the C57BL/6 mouse does not express infectious gamma-retroviruses in health, but following genetic disruption of antibody responses, the model develops spontaneous murine leukemia virus infection from endogenous loci, and this is accompanied by the development of retrovirus-induced lymphoma [12]. As discussed, C57BL/6 encode several full-length endogenous MMTV. These proviral genomes that are heavily methylated to silence viral RNA expression and most encode multiple mutations to prevent production of viral proteins [13]. Whereas other lines, such as C3H, are less resistant to MMTV infection and produce MMTV particles in milk, which leads to the development of breast cancer in offspring [14]. The effects of MMTV in 129/SvEv are largely unknown; substrains are frequently used for breeding due to the availability of embryonal stem cells, and in general, these mice are not prone to development of cancers linked with MMTV. It is possible that the SvEv WT may exhibit low-level MMTV production as shown by the enrichment of MMTV reads in the lac-toserum versus stomach cell pellet library (Table 1), but this requires further evaluation as the SvEv WT shows no appreciable phenotype of infection.

Another consideration is that the IL-10 knockout “susceptibility gene” is only linked with colitis in specific lines of inbred mice, such as 129/SvEv and C3H/HeJBir, whereas the C57BL/6 are relatively resistant to developing intestinal disease, suggesting that other genetic modifiers play a role in the process [36]. Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that a portion of the genetic background contributing to the development of colitis may include the susceptibility to MMTV or other viral infection as well.

Other considerations for any IBD model are the global versus specific effects mediated by the “susceptibility gene” lesion. For example, the T-cell TGF-β receptor II dominant-negative mouse (C57BL/6/C3H background) and the interleukin-2 receptor-α knockout mouse (C57BL/6 background) develop diffuse multi-organ inflammatory disease associated with IBD and autoimmune biliary disease, and both models exhibit markedly elevated levels of MMTV RNA and proteins in lymphoid tissue and inflamed organs [13, 37, 38]. In these models, one can argue that the diffuse disease process is likely related to the global immunodeficiency that permits emergence of endogenous retroviruses in general (even on the C57BL/6 background) and the potential for infection with other exogenous pathogens. In contrast, the IL-10-deficient models tend to develop disease restricted to the gut, which is likely due to the predominant role IL-10 plays in mediating intestinal homeostasis by down-regulating Th1 responses, NK cell activity, dendritic cell antigen presentation, and pro-inflammatory cytokine production [18].

Interestingly, while a dysbiotic microbiota (including bacteria, fungi, and viral species) is a hallmark of IBD in humans and is seen in IL-10−/− mice, we only observed small effects of cART therapy on microbial composition. Significantly, cART in the IL10−/− mice resulted in an increased abundance of the probiotic commensal microbe, Blautia, which is associated with remission in IBD patients [39]. Meanwhile, Lactobacillus species which have previously been associated with disease flare in IBD patients [40] were decreased following cART in the IL10−/− mice. These findings suggest that MMTV may play a minor role in cross communication between microbiome viruses and bacteria [17], although in our model cART did not significantly affect bacterial abundance patterns in IL10−/− mice. Rather than microbial abundance, MMTV may instead play a larger role in microbial functions.

A caveat of these studies was the use of male mice only, and the indirect method employed to reduce MMTV replication. To reduce heterogeneity of responses, male mice were used for the study because MMTV is activated by female hormone response elements and viral replication is triggered more so during female puberty. While female IL-10 mice may develop worse colitis on occasion, this is not a consistent observation. Also, the combination ART used to treat MMTV was repurposed from treating the lentivirus, HIV, and not specific for Betaretrovirus infection. Previously, we demonstrated that each of the components of this cART regimen inhibits MMTV replication and together improved MMTV-induced cholangitis [21]. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out inhibition of other retroviruses nor off target effects in modulating the model even though MMTV levels were reduced with the cART.

In conclusion, in this study, we have demonstrated that MMTV virus is present in the IL-10−/− mouse model of colitis and contributes to severity of inflammation. These results suggest that MMTV may contribute to colitis in this model, although we recognize that we did not investigate other retroviruses that could also.