# The etiopathology of these interactions have remained elusive leading to non-specific diagnostic criteria and therapeutic regimes.

It is suggested that microbial dysbiosis, pathogenic infection and host-microbe interactions cause incidence of ReA. In this study, utilising the combinatorial approach we have compiled a repertoire of microorganisms, biomolecules and pathways that are possibly involved in triggering co-evolved autoimmune disorders IBD and ReA. In our study, text mining results convey the presence of microorganisms namely Campylobacter jejuni, Escherichia coli O157:H7, Klebsiella oxytoca, Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella dysenteriae and Yersinia enterocolitica implicated in both the disorders.

The thematic concepts for microbe contribution in host immunity have been explored in our previous analysis of metabolic reconstruction and simulation of Campylobacter jejuni and Salmonella enterica. In our current study, we used a designated work-pipeline for metabolic network reconstruction and simulation of target microorganisms. The analysis conducted extracted the information via constraint-based bottom-up approach that was filtered and utilised for further computational analysis. The essential genes, proteins and metabolites of microorganisms represent the promising drug targets as these are speculated to contribute towards infection triggered host physiological drifts leading to development of the co-evolved pattern of autoimmunity in IBD and ReA.

A thorough curation pattern followed led to provide robust molecular cues in terms of essential proteins and biological networks that are correlated to the ‘interspecies communication’ using the host-microbe and microbe-microbe interaction profiling. The most closely associated common protein observed in all the selected common microbial species involved in both IBD and ReA is Na (+) /H (+) antiporter (NHAA), microbial integral membrane protein, catalyzing the exchange of 2 H (+) per Na (+) and involved in processes crucial for cell viability.

Similarly, the common host interacting protein with NHAA is Kynureninase (KYNU), involved in tryptophan metabolism and whose differential expression (upregulation and downregulation based on the control samples) have been followed in IBD patient cohorts. As per the scientific discourse presented in the studied disorders, the pathological mechanism hypothesizes that after bacterial infection, antigen-presenting cells transport bacterial antigens/peptides into the synovial membrane, where the bacterial components persist causing inflammation. It is suggested that in host-microbe interactions, bacterial proteins entering host cells interact with host proteins and inject their effector components, but has not been proven in ReA and IBD. So, this formed a basis of one of the parameters in our study design where we found the physical interactions between NHAA and KYNU and predicted that these might be the early host-microbe interactors for establishing pathogenesis in IBD associated ReA.

This could assist to comprehend the very few reports indicated in the rare autoimmune ReA, where gene expression datasets of the co-evolved disorder IBD can serve to incorporate the larger theme of gut-microbiome associations. The theme of gut-microbiome paradigm shifts thus contemplates the vital cues in triggering autoimmunity with indirect linkages to diet and environmental triggers. This is indicative of the identified target molecular signature, KYNU, found to be differentially regulated in the patient cohorts with history of infection triggered or IBD co-evolved ReA. KYNU and NHAA could serve as the robust early and essential host-microbe interacting targets and molecular indicators involved in interspecies communication in IBD associated ReA.

The investigations further were targeted for parallel analysis of other host-essential protein partners enmeshed to have interaction with host protein KYNU indicating the intricate details of host-microbe interaction information. The disease network constructed through our approach consists of 412 single connected essential protein interactors of KYNU, where 394 human essential protein interactors are found to be associated with IBD, while 3 of them (Adenosine Deaminase (ADA), Catalase (CAT) and Superoxide Dismutase 2 (SOD2)) are associated with both IBD and ReA. ADA protein has been reported in Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and ReA patient cohorts in serum samples. Similarly, CAT and manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD) genes polymorphisms were observed in ReA patient cohorts. These become part of the host-microbe disease network where such molecular elements and co-regulatory pathways represent the intricate biological cross-talk followed during disease development.

Pathological conditions can also trigger immune cells such as IL’s and TLR’s and various cytokines leading to immune cell infiltration in host and higher levels of inflammation. Genetic factors such as HLA alleles encode susceptibility, contribute to bacterial persistence and increase risk in ReA cases. Based on this we also found the interactions of important targets in our study with immunogenic and genetic factors. The host harboured assorted essential proteins were further probed for their association with non-specific protein diagnostic markers as well as with symptoms/diseases linked with IBD and ReA, accruing towards a single connected network consisting of 402 interdependent proteins.

The reciprocation of these integrated protein indicators to the disease development is conveyed through metabolite monitoring as in the study, Angiotensin I Converting Enzyme (ACE) was found to be linked with maximum symptoms/diseases. ACE is involved in catalyzing the conversion of angiotensin I into angiotensin II that is a potent vasopressor and aldosterone-stimulating peptide that controls blood pressure and fluid-electrolyte balance. This could be the indicator of involvement of microbe triggered host physiological drifts. Subsequently, the pathways associated with the proteins ramified into 78 pathways of human host speculated to give details of metabolic regulatory checkpoints where carbon metabolism is found to be associated with majority of deduced proteins. Carbon metabolism pathway implicated here as the vitally generic pathway for IBD co-related ReA confers how diet, balance of gut microbiome, antibiotic exposures can have layered impact on autoimmune disease progression and remissions. KYNU is found to be downregulated in ReA patients as compared to controls through our targeted gene expression analysis.

Collectively, the disease network followed here confers interaction of microbial NHAA with host KYNU, that is further correlated to 396 proteins, 5 markers, 66 symptoms/diseases, 78 pathways and 7 drugs. Docking analysis of drugs used to suppress the effect of IBD and ReA predicts methotrexate as an important drug that could be useful for early treatment of IBD co-evolved ReA.