# Exploring how microbiome signatures change across inflammatory bowel disease conditions and disease locations

Alastair Logan, Gregory C. A. Amos1*, Chrysi Sergaki1, Rolland Iriarte2,5, Ayman Bannaga2, Subashini Chandrapalan2,42, Elizabeth M. H. Wellington, Sjoerd Rijpkema1 & Ramesh P. Arasaradnam

Understanding the variables that influence microbiome studies is critical for successful translational research. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a complex group of diseases that can present at multiple locations within the Gastrointestinal tract. Here, using the FAMISHED study cohort, we aimed to investigate the relationship between IBD condition, IBD disease location, and the microbiome.

Signatures of the microbiome, including measures of diversity, taxonomy, and functionality, all significantly differed across the three different IBD conditions, Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), and microscopic colitis (MC). Notably, when stratifying by disease location, patients with CD in the terminal ileum were more similar to healthy controls than patients with CD in the small bowel or colon, however no differences were observed at different disease locations across patients with UC.

Change in taxonomic composition resulted in changes in function, with CD at each disease location, UC and MC all having unique functional dysbioses. CD patients in particular had deficiencies in Short-Chain Fatty Acid (SCFA) pathways. Our results demonstrate the complex relationship between IBD and the microbiome and highlight the need for consistent strategies for the stratification of clinical cohorts and downstream analysis to ensure results across microbiome studies and clinical trials are comparable.

Advances in the microbiome field have led to intense efforts to translate meaningful research into clinical interventions. To successfully develop therapeutic interventions and perform effective clinical research, effective standardisation of the microbiome space is critical1. There are multiple aspects to the standardisation of the microbiome field, with many studies demonstrating the influence of variation across technical steps and the need for robust standards and controls2. An aspect of microbiome studies that is harder to control is how studies stratify their patient cohorts, with a range of both unknown and known factors such as environmental variables and host-genetics leading to conceptually similar studies having different conclusions on the role of specific organisms in disease3. This picture is even more complex for diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), where there are multiple conditions which patients can present with and disagreement on how aspects of the disease are clinically classified4. Despite being studied as a focal point for microbiome research for over a decade5, we still do not fully understand how IBD heterogeneity influences the results of microbiome studies or how changing the way patients are stratified influences the conclusions of microbiome studies.

Although IBD is often associated with changes in the microbiome5, questions remain over how disease variability influences the diversity and composition of the microbiome. Multiple studies have explored the role of disease location and severity on taxonomic composition and diversity of the microbiome, however there is no consensus and studies often report contrasting results. For example, a recent study showed that patients with ileal and ileocolonic disease had significantly decreased microbiome diversity compared to patients with colonic disease6. This expanded on the work of previous studies which had suggested that ileal CD is more notable for its microbiome dysbiosis than non-ileal CD7 and that the microbiome of patients with disease in the ileum deviate.

1 Division of Bacteriology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC), Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire EN6 3QG, UK. 2 University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire, Coventry CV2 2DX, UK. 3 School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. 4 Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. 5 Rolland Iriarte is deceased. *email: Gregory.Amos@NIBSC.org

Scientific Reports | (2021) 11:18699 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-96942-z