# Inflammatory bowel disease biomarkers revealed by the human gut microbiome network

Mirko Hu1, Guido Caldarelli2,3,4,5* & Tommaso Gili6

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are complex medical conditions in which the gut microbiota is attacked by the immune system of genetically predisposed subjects when exposed to yet unclear environmental factors. The complexity of this class of diseases makes them suitable to be represented and studied with network science. In this paper, the metagenomic data of control, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis subjects’ gut microbiota were investigated by representing this data as correlation networks and co-expression networks. We obtained correlation networks by calculating Pearson’s correlation between gene expression across subjects. A percolation-based procedure was used to threshold and binarize the adjacency matrices. In contrast, co-expression networks involved the construction of the bipartite subjects-genes networks and the monopartite genes-genes projection after binarization of the biadjacency matrix. Centrality measures and community detection were used on the so-built networks to mine data complexity and highlight possible biomarkers of the diseases. The main results were about the modules of Bacteroides, which were connected in the control subjects’ correlation network, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, where co-enzyme A became central in IBD correlation networks and Escherichia coli, whose module has different patterns of integration within the whole network in the different diagnoses.

Microbes are ubiquitous. They can be found everywhere, from radioactive waste to the human gastrointestinal tract. In and on the human body, they have evolved to co-exist with their host, and it is estimated that the number of microbes hosted by the human body is of the same order of magnitude as the number of human cells1. In particular, the 1014 commensal microbes in the intestinal tract form the human gut microbiota, which has evolved to live in symbiosis with its host2. It is widely accepted that this symbiosis begins from birth, and the microbial communities stabilize with age until the formation of an adult microbiota3. Its genetic content (called the microbiome) characterizes everyone, also raising concerns about identity and privacy issues, specifically when the study and the manipulation of the microbiota are considered4. Since the 1840s, when the concept of gut microbiota first appeared, the topic has been studied for two centuries5, and, at the moment, it is known that the gut microbiota has a fundamental role in shaping the gut barriers6, training the host immune system and regulating the metabolism7. When the compositional and metabolic equilibrium of the commensal microbes living in the gut is disrupted, different types of diseases arise, such as metabolic disorders or central nervous system disorders8. Historically, traditional medicine attempted to re-establish this equilibrium through remedies intervening in the digestive system, such as fasting, diets, and the assumption of spring waters or laxatives. A recent procedure9 that was introduced to tackle the Clostridioides difficile infection is the faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) which consists in repopulating the intestinal tract of an ill subject with the microbiota of a healthy donor.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), which comprise Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), are an essential class of diseases that arise from dysbiosis and are being treated with FMT. Typical symptoms of this class of diseases are chronic diarrhoea, abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, weight loss, and fatigue10. Although CD and UC are both characterized by the inflammation of the intestinal tract, there are several differences between the two diagnoses that span from the environmental factors that cause them, e.g., smoking or diet, to the clinical and endoscopic findings in the two diagnoses11. Overall, IBDs are becoming widespread in modern society because of lifestyle changes, socioeconomic developments, and environmental causes12. Until now, it has been known that IBD is an exaggerated immune response to the gut microbiota of genetically predisposed subjects.

1Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, 43121 Parma, Italy. 2Department of Molecular Science and Nanosystems, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, 30123 Venice, Italy. 3Institute of Complex Systems, National Research Council (ISC-CNR), 00185, Rome, Italy. 4Fondazione per il Futuro delle Città, FFC, 50133 Firenze, Italy. 5European Centre for Living Technology, (ECLT), 30123 Venice, Italy. 6Networks Unit, IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca, 55100 Lucca, Italy. *email: guido.caldarelli@unive.it

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:19428 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-46184-y