# Involvement of Spine, Peripheral or Lower Joints

Involvement of spine, peripheral or lower joints along with extra-articular inflammatory manifestations (beyond joints), with shared characteristics involving the modulations at the gut-joint axis leading to co-evolved autoimmune disorders. ReA is a rare seronegative post-infectious (gastrointestinal or genitourinary) autoimmune disorder, with symptomatic features and concordant dysbiosis, that are shared with seronegative arthropathies such as Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS) and Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA)1–3. The prevalence of IBD, an idiopathic inflammatory autoimmunity is not rare with disease progression having shared characteristics of infectious diarrhea and inflammation with seronegative arthropathies. IBD is categorised into Ulcerative Colitis (UC) and Crohn’s Disease (CD) affecting the gastrointestinal tract structured mostly due to gut dysbiosis4,5. IBD, clinically associated with AS and PsA, is also voiced to be co-regulated with other forms of seronegative rheumatological associations or spondyloarthropathies6,7.

Host genetic histocompatibility molecule HLA (HLA-B27, HLA-B51 and HLA-DRB1), responsible for the regulation of immune system has been reported to be associated with the co-evolved autoimmune dysbiosis (both ReA and IBD)8,9. The post-dysenteric ReA is speculated to confer mechanism of molecular mimicry (sequence cross reactivity of gut derived microbial antigen with host HLA protein) leading to autoantibody development, inflammatory response and tissue damage in host10–12. The exact detailing of the process however is not confirmed in either clinical setting or in experimental colitis models12–14. The segregated contribution of HLA-B27 related genetic alleles in aggravating pathogenesis in ReA patients, confer inconclusive significance of these genes as the singular biomarker due to the varied clinical patterns in patient cohorts.

Further, the immune triggering in such microbial rheumatism is due to the disturbance of the gut barrier, disruptions in immune regulatory mechanisms, translocation of pathogens or microbial elements, trafficking of gut derived immunocompetent cells, immune response complexes as well as metabolites.

Thus, the co-evolved inflammatory manifestations in IBD and ReA show the cumulative contribution of HLA-B27, microbes, proinflammatory cytokines (TLR’s e.g. TLR-4) and immunogenic factors like CRP, IL-6, IL-13, IFN-γ and TNF in the Th2 and Th1 mediated responses in the pathogenicity of ReA and IBD15–18.

The autoimmune disorders are studied mostly through genetic, environmental and immunogenic features using direct or indirect (animal models) estimation studies that predispose individuals to gut-joint inflammatory conditions. Consequently, etiopathogenesis mechanisms for each disorder have been derived separately, though the concurring triggering elements for precise pathogenic modulation of such disorders having shared characteristics have not been coordinated. Shifts in gut microbiome composition occur when the commensal gut microbes (symbiotic relationships with human host confining inflammatory response and regulating adaptive and innate immunity) shift towards dysbiosis caused via pathogenic microbes contributing in the immunopathogenesis of enteropathic disorders, IBD and ReA19.

Clinical variables and chronic enteric infection exemplars, analysed from the patient cohorts have ascertained the contribution of various species of Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia and Campylobacter enteropathogens along with Chlamydia as the co-occuring taxa at the host–pathogen interface having precedence in both ReA and IBD3,20–25. The infectious regime in both ReA and IBD patient cohorts have been followed after episode of gastroenteritis through either salmonellosis, shigellosis, yersiniosis, campylobacteriosis or enterocoloitis3,20,23,26,27 or urogenital infections through microbial species of Chlamydia21,22, where either the microbe itself, specific antibodies or their genetic components have been reported in the joint fluid following infection.

The post-infectious development and dysregulation due to the microbes or their associated metabolites could serve as potential arthritogenic targets in post-enteric arthritis, where immunological cross-reactivity leads to generation of auto-antibodyome28,29. This is due to presence of microbe encoded peptides, outer membrane proteins, microbial metabolites or antigens found in synovial fluid, serum and fecal samples of patients1,13,14,30–36. Thus, the metabolite analyses could systematically validate contribution of microorganisms and microbial bioactive molecules stimulating diverse pathophysiological signaling pathways as the generic triggers for co-evolved disorders37–39.

Recurrence40–42 depends on the detailed microbiome association studies with the host genetics structuring the immunogenic trends43–45. The gut derived core host-microbe and microbe-microbe ‘interspecies communication’ would enhance the existing knowledge of such co-existent disorders IBD and ReA, while similar approach has recently been followed by Manasson et al., 2018 for ReA and PsA. Due to the dearth in the experimentally derived analyses of rare disorder ReA, expression profiling of co-evolved IBD with detailed information of the molecular signatures were estimated that can postulate new therapeutic tools and disease prevention strategies for ReA.

The available data can unlock the potential common targets in the enteropathic autoimmunity by evaluation for the common triggering microbes that can unravel many interesting biological associations and events associated with the infectious disorders IBD and ReA.

The combinatorial study pipeline was designed to utilize in-silico systems biology approaches using metabolic network reconstructions for analyzing biochemical transformations to comprehend the significant interplay of gut-microbiome modulations between myriad of molecules such as genes, proteins, metabolites or biomarkers and varying pathways as previously documented47,48. Simulation studies for gene essentiality analysis, gene filtration by removing the paralogs and homologs, network analysis to understand the function of proteins, association between protein-pathway, disease-gene, disease-disease and protein–protein interaction networks studies were inculcated to find more robust targets and hub proteins49,50. Further, gene expression data thus helps predicts the immunopathogenesis involving the common microbes and microbial components either singularly or through the closely-knit connections between contributing microorganisms to postulate the synthesis of post-infectious ReA and IBD.

We focus on multi-network analysis incorporating the simultaneous associations from the selected microorganisms collectively while most of these associations have been studied individually in other studies. This new