# 2.3. Interactions between Gut Microbiome and Short-Chain Fatty Acids in High Dietary Salt

The metabolites generated from the microbiota are essential for host–microbe interactions. A high-salt diet can affect the intestinal microbiota and their metabolites. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as butyrate, propionate, and acetate, are metabolites produced by the gut microbiota and offer the intestinal epithelium a significant source of energy [34]. SCFAs are generated through the bacterial fermentation of dietary fiber within the gastrointestinal tract [35]. Additionally, SCFAs are vital for maintaining intestinal homeostasis and possess crucial immunomodulatory functions. They work by blocking histone deacetylase (HDAC) and stimulating GPCRs found in intestinal epithelial cells and immune cells to reduce inflammation in the intestinal mucosa [36]. As a conduit between microbes and the host, the intestinal flora can exert influence over host physiology at the intestinal level or via the bloodstream, given the potential for metabolites to cross the barrier between the two [28]. It can be concluded that a high salt intake affects the gut microbes and metabolites, as well as the normal physiological processes that occur in the host.

In a mice model, Hu L et al. found that high dietary salt can directly cause gut dysbiosis, and particularly reduced SCFA production. Their results demonstrated that a diet with a high salt content led to a notable reduction in the proportions of Bacteroidetes (specifically S24-7 and Alloprevotella) and Proteobacteria, while the proportion of Firmicutes (specifically Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae) significantly increased. Additionally, the absolute concentrations of acetate, propionate, and butyrate in fecal samples from mice fed with a high-salt diet were found to be reduced in comparison to those of the control group [37]. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the primary butyrate-producing bacteria, while the Bacteroidetes are also responsible for the production of acetate and propionate [36]. Butyrate has been demonstrated to bind to GPR43, thereby activating the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines, including TGFβ and IL-10, and upregulating FOXP3 in Treg cells. Additionally, butyrate has been shown to inhibit histone deacetylase activity, which, in turn, downregulates NF-κβ-mediated inflammatory responses [38]. A reduction in butyrate levels has been demonstrated to result in an increase in inflammatory processes. This indicates that a high salt intake can lead to change in the gut microbiota to decrease the SCFAs that are considered as healthy, which can affect gut immune homeostasis.

In addition, in a multi-omics analysis of the gut microbial community in IBD, Lloyd-Price J. et al. observed a reduction in SCFAs, particularly butyrate, in IBD patients with dysbiosis samples compared to non-dysbiotic samples with IBD [39]. Similarly, another study demonstrated that, in a mouse model, the exacerbation of colitis induced by a high-salt diet in comparison to a normal diet was associated with a reduction in the genera of major SCFAs producers, including Lachnospiraceae, Clostridiales, and Oscillospira. This, in turn, led to a protective effect in the gut, characterized by a reduction in the production of SCFAs, particularly butyrate [40]. It can be postulated that an elevated sodium consumption may exert a diminishing influence on the concentration of SCFAs, particularly butyrate, in mice models. In patients with IBD, a high salt intake may result in a reduction in SCFAs, which could exacerbate the disruption of the intestinal microbiome and, consequently, the severity of the disease.

However, these findings contrast with Bier A. et al. [41], who showed that fecal samples from rat model fed with a high-salt diet and exhibiting hypertension demonstrated elevated levels of SCFAs, particularly acetate, propionate, and isobutyrate, as opposed to butyrate. This suggests the need for greater understanding in different animal models. Furthermore, the study by Bier et al. posited that no particular bacterial strain was responsible for altering the levels of SCFAs [41]. In summary, the evidence for a high-sodium-intake-induced immune system response indicates an imbalance in the intestinal environment or homeostasis.