# I. INTRODUCTION

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a term used to describe a group of chronic autoimmune diseases, including ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD), that affect the gastrointestinal tract. The characteristic prolonged inflammation coupled with immune dysregulation result in damage to the gastrointestinal tract. Although the pathogenesis of IBD still remains unclear, its mechanism is believed to be associated with genetic, environmental, gut microbiota and immune response factors (Ocansey et al., 2019). At the site of intestinal mucosal inflammation, profound microenvironmental changes take place including depletion of local nutrients, imbalances in tissue oxygen supply and demand and the production of high quantities of reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates. The resultant oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and hypoxia stress response signalling affect mucosal barrier integrity, cell survival, immunomodulation, as well as the composition, diversity and metabolic profiles of the gut microbiota (Taylor & Colgan, 2007; Cao, 2018). Within the IBD microenvironment (Fig. 1), there is a dynamic and complex interplay between immune and non-immune cells via the mediation of secreted cytokines, which invariably participate in the perpetuation and amplification of the IBD-associated inflammatory cascade (Marafini et al., 2019). Inflammatory cells such as polymorphonuclear neutrophils, macrophages and monocytes, and adaptive immune cells such as local T and B cells are recruited in response to chemokine signals produced within the site of active inflammation, such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), leukotriene B4 (LTB4), platelet-activating factor (PAF), complement factor C5a, and N-formylated peptides (Colgan, Curtis, & Campbell, 2013; Campbell, Kao, & Colgan, 2016; Marafini et al., 2019).

IBD therapies seek to correct immune dysregulation and dampen inflammation within the intestinal mucosa. Amongst such therapies is exosome-based therapy. As extracellular vesicles (EVs), exosomes are released by different types of cells and contain a variety of functional units mainly proteins, nucleic acids and lipids. Based on their endogenous properties and multifunctional abilities, these 30–150 nm lipid bilayer membrane vesicles have generated much recent interest in the search for medicines and pharmaceutical interventions for autoimmune diseases (including IBD) and several other conditions such as heart disease, cognitive decline, diabetes, and bone and muscle conditions (Phinney & Pittenger, 2017; Samanta et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). Exosomes play central roles in cell–cell communication that result in the modulation of several pathophysiological pathways such as immune responses in inflammation, infection and tumour growth, via vesicular transport and delivery of proteins and nucleic acids to recipient cells (Barile & Vassalli, 2017). Within the IBD microenvironment, exosomes modulate factors such as immune system cells, the gut microbiota, and the intestinal barrier as part of the mechanism to repair damage and restore intestinal mucosal functions. Herein, we review the functional effects of exosomal components in IBD attenuation, particularly the modulatory effects of exosomes on immune system cells, the gut microbiome, and intestinal barrier integrity in the treatment of IBD. We also discuss the application of exosomal components as potential biomarkers of IBD and the use of modified exosomes in IBD treatment.

Biological Reviews 95 (2020) 1287–1307 © 2020 The Authors. Biological Reviews published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Cambridge Philosophical Society.