Cells 2019, 8, 659 12 of 26

been proposed that stress gradually contributes to the development or exacerbation of IBD (as reviewed elsewhere [28, 143]). Vice versa, compared to the general population, young patients with IBD displayed higher rates of psychological stress, and these results were further confirmed in gastrointestinal disorders such as IBS [144, 145]. Together, these data imply that the disease itself may have a direct impact on the quality of life of patients.

Yet, it is not clear whether individuals with higher stress also experience more IBD symptoms. A large cross-sectional, population-based study of IBD patients showed that the relationship between intestinal inflammation and symptomatic disease activity differed between Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis [146]. Whereas Crohn’s disease did not associate with intestinal inflammation and disease activity symptoms, an association was found for ulcerative colitis. These findings suggest that the duration and intensity of stress factors may have differential influences on chronic inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, this study showed that perceived stress in both diseases correlated with disease activity symptoms, while not with inflammation [146]. Although the majority of conventional therapies in IBD focus on tackling intestinal inflammation, these insights open new venues for stress reduction in the management of IBD.

# 6. Managing Stress in IBD: Does It Make the Gut Feel Better?

In recent years, significant progress has been made in the treatment of IBD, focusing either on targeted therapies [147] or on alternative and complementary strategies [148], which has recently been extensively reviewed [147, 148]. Nevertheless, there is no certain cure for IBD due to the limited effectiveness of current therapies, which often even goes hand in hand with significant side effects. Quality of life as well as anxiety and depression are known predictors of negative medical outcomes in many chronic conditions, and as reviewed, stress has a profound impact on these variables in patients with IBD. Hence, a number of approaches have focused on relieving stress as a potential therapeutic option in IBD (Table 3) [148, 149].

Stress management is a technique used to diminish the physiological effects of stress and tension, and to help the individual to improve his/her coping skill. One variant of such therapy is relaxation, by which the individual is trained by a therapist or in a self-directed manner to create physiological and mental rest. Several studies showed the effectiveness of relaxation training in a variety of physical illnesses, including cardiovascular disease, arthritis [150], and IBD [151–153]. Previously, it was shown that stress management could significantly improve IBD symptoms such as pain and fatigue [151]. In line, behavioral self-management therapy resulted in a 57% decrease in 1 year risk to relapse in IBD patients [152], supporting the beneficial effects of stress management in IBD. More recently, two clinical studies pointed towards the beneficial effects of mindfulness on psychological and physical symptoms, quality of life, and C-reactive protein, an established biomarker [154], in patients with IBD [155, 156]. However, based on a systematic review, McCombie et al. [153] concluded that the effect of psychotherapy led to inconsistent results in IBD patients. It should be noted that the studies included in this study focused on a wide range of therapies. Thus, although meditation and relaxation may have beneficial effects on inflammatory activity and quality of life in IBD patients, the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions on disease activity remains to be elucidated.